# Sound-Separation

Sometimes when trying to learn a guitar part from a song, I find the vocals interfere with my listening. I could of course spend a lot of time practicing my listening skills to fix this problem... or I could spend that time trying to make a computer delete the voice. I have implemented a separation algorithm described in the paper "Music/Voice Separation Using the 2D Fourier Transform" (Seetharaman, Pishdadian, and Pardo). This paper is quite short and easily readable, so I highly recommend taking a look for far better coverage of the algorithm than I can provide.

The logic behind the algorithm is that, given a signal we may, through a couple of fourier transforms, convert it to a two dimensional array. High peaks in the magnitude of the values of this array correspond to a consistent/repetitive sound in the original signal. Often in modern music, such repetitive sounds are considered the background parts, and often correspond to the instrumental parts. So, we select only the noises causing these peaks to make the background track, and put all other sounds in the foreground track.

Results are currently not great. First, for ease while programming, only WAV files with much of the metadata scrubbed away is usable. This will need to be improved upon in the final program; it should handle MP3s and common metadata like track names should not cause errors. Additionally, both the foreground and background tracks sound sort of like the original song, but with some of instruments being played in another room. Granted, the example tracks linked in the paper do not involve full separation either; there is usually a hint of melody lurking in the background tracks.

The largest problem is my choice of algorithm. The major draw of this algorithm to me is its simplicity. However, it does not do what I wanted, and I should have known it would not from the start. The key method used to distinguish background is how repetitive a sound is, so this algorithm cannot distinguish individual instruments. While for many songs it can separate instrumental and vocals, this is not guaranteed. In fact, in the examples linked in the paper, any instrumental solos will be treated as foreground. Thus, this algorithm is incompatible with my original goal to scrub vocals from a song. Lesson learned: for my next attempt I will actually use my brain when picking an algorithm, and not be seduced by simple solutions to the wrong problems.
